# Carter-at-al-J.-Anal.-At.-Spectrom.-2023-38-818-826
Inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) is an important tool for measuring nutrient elements in food. ICP-OES methods typically determine analytical concentrations using external standard calibration but can be susceptible to matrix effects. The method of standard additions does not suffer from matrix effects but is time consuming and labor intensive. Automated standard dilution analysis (SDA) allows for online matrix matched calibration without preparing individual standard additions for each sample matrix. This approach may solve both time and matrix issues and has been described in the literature as an attractive alternative to standard additions. The working range of the method for nutrient elements, however, is an understudied feature of SDA that may be a potential drawback to routine analysis of foods. We evaluated automated SDA performance through the analysis of 10 reference materials and four fortified (i.e., spiked) foods spanning the AOAC food triangle. We evaluated the working range, accuracy, and precision for analyses of nutrient elements in foods. Accepted accuracy (80–120% recovery) was achieved for 10 nutrient elements, Ca, Cu, Fe, K, Mg, Mn, Na, P, S, and Zn, when the analytical solution concentration to standard concentration ratio was less than 10. This equates to a working range for each element spanning at least two orders of magnitude. Removing outliers, Z scores (n = 95) ranged from −1.8 to 0.88, and the average recovery (n = 85) from fortification experiments was 97 ± 12% (2σ). Therefore, automated SDA applied to ICP-OES may be used for nutrient elemental analyses in samples with difficult matrices such as foods.
